[Music]
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is dr mark eatonson i'm a licensed
psychologist specializing in the
treatment of pathological narcissism and
related disorders and i'm also author of
the book unmasking narcissism a guide to
understanding the narcissist in your
life
so today i'd like to talk about
acceptance
acceptance really lies at the heart of
the healing process for many
psychological issues including npd
i used to work at an intensive
outpatient treatment program where we
used an approach called acceptance and
commitment therapy
which is often abbreviated simply as act
in this treatment program we had a lot
of folks who had severe anxiety
disorders and ocd and their suffering
was excruciating their lives had become
intolerably narrow
and there was so much that they could no
longer do
because of their anxiety their panic
attacks their obsessions and compulsions
so
you might be able to imagine that they
weren't always too happy
when the first thing that we would talk
about was acceptance
they didn't want to accept their anxiety
they wanted to get rid of it
but paradoxically
the best way to reduce the hold that
almost any psychological issue has over
your life
is acceptance
and here's why
a large percentage of the suffering in
mental illness is actually caused by
struggles that occur inside of ourselves
we struggle against feelings thoughts
fantasies and fears
we try to quote get rid of them
because they trouble us
but it isn't actually possible to get
rid of mental phenomena
the more we think about it and stress
over it the more room it takes up in our
minds
imagine trying desperately
not to think of an elephant
the very act of trying not to do that
is actually what brings the thought of
an elephant to mind
when it comes to thoughts and feelings
the harder we fight
the more they take over
and this is why acceptance is such a
powerful tool
it's a fundamental shift in our stance
toward whatever is troubling us
as the anxiety patients worked toward
acceptance
they experienced fewer panic attacks
fewer obsessions and they engaged in
fewer compulsions
the cloud of dread about having another
attack
slowly shifted into
an acceptance that attacks will occur
and this frees up energy to refocus on
living a life full of meaning
rather than a life spent trying to avoid
having more attacks
now i want to stress that acceptance
isn't the only tool a person needs on
the path of healing and recovery
but i would argue that it's one of the
most important
i also want to stress that acceptance is
not the same thing as resignation
you shouldn't just throw your hands up
and resign yourself to whatever's
troubling you
that's a passive stance and it actually
tends to drive people deeper into their
issues acceptance isn't passive it's
active
it's embracing what's there
with both understanding and compassion
so let's talk about how this concept
applies to narcissism
narcissistic individuals tend to fight
against parts of the self
they fight against feelings of
inferiority or envy or shame or weakness
they try to become someone else a person
who doesn't experience such unwanted
feelings
they strive toward
a state of self-sufficiency
need dependency vulnerability
these experiences belong to a part of
the self that gets split off
hidden away
sometimes even from the person
themselves
there tends to be a lot of reactivity to
those sorts of experiences
they're pushed away until they
inevitably gain enough mass to take over
and cause a collapse of the individual's
defenses
for some people this happens often
sometimes often enough that they exist
in a chronic state of collapse
but for others it can be relatively rare
but it's important to note that it
happens to everyone abraham lincoln
famously observed that a house divided
against itself cannot stand
the attempt to remove unwanted parts of
the self creates instability in the
person's self-image in their
relationships and in their professional
life
the harder we fight against who we are
the harder we inevitably fall
this is where acceptance comes into play
the unwanted parts of the self
are still parts of the self whether we
like it or not
they represent authentic experience they
hold important pieces of our story that
simply can't be left out
we actually lose more than we gain by
trying to disown them
healing the self means integration it
means no longer existing as
separated split off parts of a person
but that also means taking profound
ownership of whatever exists inside
it means accepting the defensive
adaptations that have developed to hide
and protect those vulnerable parts
grandiosity arrogance entitlement
self-centeredness
these are the parts of the narcissistic
experience that society rejects
and many individuals with this disorder
internalize that rejection and they
actually use it to further segment and
divide their internal experience
a house divided cannot stand
we cannot achieve peace
hating what's inside of us
so whatever you're struggling with
consider what life could be like without
that struggle
remember
that doesn't mean giving in or resigning
it means accepting what's inside as a
foundation for any work that might come
after
consider the possibility
that you could be a whole person
and that you could still be okay
it's a long process
and it's often a painful one
and it's hard to do on your own
which is why therapy is so important
but there's a simple step you can take
to get started on the path of acceptance
many people may have heard about
mindfulness meditation
it's very much in vogue in recent years
but there's a reason for that
mindfulness is all about acceptance
study after study continually shows us
that this basic shift in stance toward
our mental life is profoundly impactful
so here's how you do it
find a comfortable place to sit
keep a straight back and set a timer on
your phone for five minutes
close your eyes
and now focus on breathing in
and out
let the air go all the way down to your
diaphragm
and just watch
watch your breathing
and as you do
thoughts will come
you might feel ridiculous or impatient
you might feel skeptical
maybe you have an itch
or a cramp
you'll wonder when the time will be up
etcetera
all of it is normal
your only job is to watch your
experience
and let go
notice thoughts and feelings
but try not to judge them
try not to push them away
and try not to cling to them
try to just watch
and let them go
if you feel frustrated that you aren't
doing it right
just notice that feeling
and the judgment that's attached to it
and then let it go
when you notice you've drifted away from
your breath and into your thoughts
notice that and then gently return your
attention to your breathing
that's it
when the timer goes off get up and go
about your day
and over time
and with practice you can extend the
time you're meditating up to 20 30 or
even 40 minutes
meditation is both easier and more
difficult than it sounds
and you may be wondering uh what's the
point
well
active acceptance is like a muscle that
needs to be exercised in order to get
strong
every time you notice a thought feeling
or experience and then let it go
you're practicing acceptance
and the more you do this the better
you'll get at being less reactive to
unwanted thoughts and feelings in your
daily life
over time you'll notice more space
inside
more peace
less division
if you notice that you're having trouble
sitting in silence
there are lots of apps that can help you
with guided mindfulness meditations
but consider making this a daily
practice
as always this is general information
that's not intended to address anyone's
specific situation
if you struggle with narcissism or npd
you should seek the support of a
licensed mental health professional
who's trained
in working with this particular disorder
they can help you learn to recognize the
internal divisions and defenses that
drive narcissistic pathology
there are many parts of the self that we
simply can't see on our own
as the psychoanalyst wilfred beon
observed
some thoughts
take two people to think
okay so that's it for today
please reach out with questions or
suggestions for future episodes and
until next time take good care
[Music]
you